---
layout: post
title:  'FTX Paper'
date:   2023-02-01
permalink: 'posts/ftx-paper'
---

Haven't blogged in a while, but here's a paper that I wrote last semester on FTX in the interim. I'll write a long update probably at the end of the spring semester on my first year at Harvard.

# The FTX Collapse: What’s Next for Crypto Exchanges?

Last month, FTX was the second largest centralized cryptocurrency exchange in the world, with over 1 million users and valued at over 32 billion dollars (Browne). The face of the company, CEO and eccentric billionaire Sam Bankman-Fried, was regarded as the golden boy of crypto—a genius MIT graduate who built a crypto empire from the ground up and donated millions to philanthropic causes and bailing out many notable crypto projects. FTX seemed unstoppable. Bankman-Fried had multiple glowing profiles about him written, including a 13,000 word article detailing his rise to fame by Sequoia Capital, the legendary venture capital firm behind the likes of PayPal, Google, and Reddit (Sequoia). The firm invested over 200 million dollars into FTX and wrote that Bankman-Fried “himself has amassed more wealth in a shorter period of time than anyone else, ever” and “[Bankman-Fried] is just a winner.” As the undisputed king of crypto, Bankman-Fried led FTX to buy the naming rights to a Miami arena, run Super Bowl ads, and recruit prominent celebrities such as Tom Brady and Steph Curry to endorse the company (MSN). In a matter of a week, in what can only be labeled as “one of history’s greatest-ever destructions of wealth”, everything collapsed (Feng and Maloney). Revelations that FTX was lending out customer deposits and did not have enough liquidity to cover them caused a textbook bank run with billions of dollars leaving the exchange in a matter of hours. Now, the revelations have proved to be true; FTX is undergoing Chapter 11 bankruptcy filings, a disgraced Sam Bankman-Fried has resigned, FTX owes creditors some 3.1 billion dollars, and the once-raving profile from Sequoia has been replaced with a gloomy message that the firm has lost all of its 214 million dollar investment (Sequoia).

The sheer scope of the FTX collapse has resulted in a significant setback for the credibility of the crypto industry in general, and has raised the important question: what does the story of FTX and its collapse reveal about the future of crypto exchanges and how to prevent similar disasters going forward? On Capitol Hill, politicians on both sides of the aisle are pushing for the increased regulation of centralized crypto exchanges in light of the collapse. Ranking Member of the United States House Committee on Financial Services Patrick McHenry (R-NC) said that FTX’s collapse was a “dumpster fire” and wanted “guardrails, safe and sound ways to deal with crypto” (Wright). Senator Elizabeth Warren (D-MA) wrote in a Wall Street Journal op-ed, “FTX’s implosion should be a wake-up call. Regulators must enforce the law before more people get cheated” (Warren). Politicians such as McHenry and Warren argue the FTX catastrophe affirms that the government should play a major role by regulating centralized crypto exchanges in order to protect the safety and security of user funds.

On the other hand, some crypto proponents argue “the whole purpose of FTX, as a centralized exchange for tokens, betrays the impulse on which cryptocurrencies began” (Wang). They argue that the FTX collapse shows that centralized exchanges inherently cannot be trusted, and instead advocate for the usage of decentralized exchanges—automated crypto exchanges governed by codified contracts. Alex Andryunion, the CEO of Gotbit, a leading crypto consultancy, says that “decentralization is on the winning side … many of our clients [after the FTX collapse] have asked to withdraw funds from a centralized exchange and switch the market control of their tokens to [decentralized exchanges] only” (Rapoza).

While the government regulation of centralized exchanges appears to be able to prevent future disasters such as the FTX collapse, the story of FTX instead shows that centralized crypto exchanges are built on a core fallacy—even with regulation, they destroy the fundamental ethos of crypto being a decentralized currency. Despite the appeal of decentralized exchanges in the face of the FTX collapse, ultimately the crash reveals something even broader: crypto exchanges in and of themselves, whether regulated or decentralized, should not be trusted nor used.

Crypto frauds have been running rampant ever since the inception of cryptocurrency as a concept: a fully decentralized peer-to-peer digital currency free from the oversight of a central bank or government. Because these digital currencies are difficult for users to manage and trade themselves, centralized solutions such as FTX have emerged to provide an easy way for users to store and exchange crypto on their platform instead (Smith). These centralized exchanges work by holding crypto on behalf of users so they can easily interact with their funds, with the understanding that users can withdraw their funds from the exchange into their own custody whenever they please. These exchanges are known as being "centralized" because all transactions are processed and verified by the exchange itself, rather than being distributed across a network of users. This means that the exchange has full control over the transactions that take place on its platform, which can make it easier for the exchange to provide services like wallet management or fiat currency conversion. However, it also means that the exchange is a single point of failure and can be more vulnerable to security breaches or other problems (BeInCrypto). Decentralized exchanges, on the other hand, are built on blockchain technology and do not have a central authority controlling them. Instead, transactions are processed and verified by a network of users, which makes the exchange more secure and resistant to tampering or censorship. The network of users agree on “smart contracts”, self-executing contracts with the terms of the agreement between buyer and seller being directly written into lines of code. However, they can be, understandably, more complex to use and may not offer the same range of features as centralized exchanges (BeInCrypto). In the case of FTX, the company was a centralized crypto exchange with a centralized point of failure, namely Sam Bankman-Fried himself. The spark behind the catastrophe was Bankman-Fried taking control of customer deposits and secretly lending them out to his trading firm Alameda Research, hidden in part due to FTX’s “complete failure of corporate controls and such a complete absence of trustworthy financial information” as described by FTX’s bankruptcy court filings (Jay III).

At a first glance, the FTX collapse may suggest that government regulation of centralized crypto exchanges is the perfect method to protect the crypto industry moving forward. However, by digging deeper into the weeds of FTX’s involvement on Capitol Hill, it is evident that even with regulation, centralized crypto exchanges fundamentally destroy the ethos of cryptocurrency being a decentralized store of value. Following FTX’s collapse, a coalition of bipartisan support from politicians overwhelmingly have advocated for bills to be passed enabling the regulation of said exchanges. They have essentially banded together, saying that “now more than ever, it is clear that there are major consequences when cryptocurrency entities operate without robust federal oversight and protections for customers” (Waters D-C) and that “by going for months and months without addressing the digital asset industry that has grown so quickly, we have put ourselves at a regulatory disadvantage in dealing with the lack of consumer protections.” (Gillibrand D-NY).

Although when taken at face value these statements seem to hint towards the safe regulation of centralized crypto exchanges following the FTX collapse, the truth is far from what meets the eye. Looking more closely into FTX’s story, a chilling bombshell emerges—leading up to FTX’s implosion, Sam Bankman-Fried, on behalf of FTX, heavily lobbied in support of government regulation. Bankman-Fried boasted that FTX was the “most regulated” crypto exchange and actively invited authorities to scrutinize the company (Fox Business). Crypto regulation bills that landed on the floor of the Senate well before the collapse have been supported by Sam Bankman-Fried in the past - in fact, the Commodity Futures Trading Commision (CFTC) had met with FTX officials 10 times over the past couple of years. During a hearing after the collapse, the director of the CFTC had to “wiggle around questions about the number of meetings and communications he had with Bankman-Fried.” (Barr). It is quite simply astonishing that the CEO of the FTX itself actively supported and invited more regulation to his company while it was undergoing egregious acts of malpractice. 
There is only one logical explanation for this engagement—Sam Bankman-Fried, put simply, had some degree of control with the United States government in regards to regulation. He appeared honest and open about FTX to the public, while lobbying lawmakers to view FTX without any suspicion. This notion is supported by a text exchange between Vox and Bankman-Fried immediately following the collapse of FTX. When asked if his support of regulation was “just PR”, he replied “yeah, just PR … fuck regulators … they make everything worse … they don’t protect customers at all.” (Piper). The FTX debacle shows that centralized crypto exchange regulation, while seemingly a useful, clear, and safe response from the outside, is simply a catalyst for deep-pocketed companies such as FTX to shield themselves and hide their negligence. Sam Bankman-Fried did not want regulation to protect his users, and instead wanted regulation to protect FTX’s competitive advantage. What FTX was able to do from a regulatory standpoint suggests that influencing crypto regulators on Capitol Hill can and will continue to happen, even with increased regulation. This is demonstrated through the fact that even before the FTX collapse and politicians began banding together to call for regulation, there had already been regulation bills in place which were heavily influenced by people such as Bankman-Fried—the FTX story suggests that this was not an isolated incident and the influence will not stop. The sheer scope of what FTX grew to become and how easy it was for Bankman-Fried to manipulate regulators implies that even with more strict regulations, there will be more of these incidents in the future, with new CEOs and new centralized exchanges that come in right where FTX left off.

Taking this crux a step further, the FTX story reveals dirty CEOs and lobbyists pushing to change regulations to their benefit, leading to the conclusion that the landscape of centralized crypto exchanges stands to be no different than traditional financial institutions ripe with malfeasance. For example, in the 2008 financial crisis, the now-defunct Lehman Brothers was reported to be a “big player in donating to political campaigns, which could be a plus if the struggling investment bank needs federal help” (Drawbaugh). In an eerily similar fashion, FTX executives donated over 70 million dollars to political campaigns, with Sam Bankman-Fried being the overall second highest liberal donor just weeks before FTX’s bankruptcy (Biron). In that sense, the FTX collapse shows how centralized crypto exchanges destroy the ethos of cryptocurrency, as mentioned earlier, “a fully decentralized peer-to-peer digital currency free from the oversight of a central bank or government.” By centralized exchanges engaging in the same egregious rule-bending and corruption that plague traditional financial institutions under the oversight of the government, this shining light of crypto is extinguished. Ultimately, the FTX regulatory landscape suggests that any attempts to regulate crypto fundamentally defeats the purpose of crypto itself - there is no need for cryptocurrencies other than the fact that it is decentralized, open, anonymous, and digital. Attempting to remove these freedoms that crypto offers is the equivalent of stripping the core beliefs of the crypto movement itself to the point where cryptocurrencies are the same as a digital fiat dollar equivalent.

Outside of Capitol Hill, some proponents of crypto argue instead that the FTX collapse shows decentralized exchanges should pave the way for the future of crypto. While this may seem as a formidable prospect, in reality the story of FTX shows how deeply intertwined decentralized exchanges are with similar instances of fraud and deception. Coindesk, the very same new site which published internal balance sheets that sparked the entire FTX collapse, published an op-ed detailing that “the meltdown of Sam Bankman-Fried's crypto trading empire could not, and would not, have happened to a decentralized and transparent protocol” and “despite sell-offs, [decentralized exchanges] have been functioning smoothly … if that isn’t consumer protection, I don’t know what is” (Cassatt). Supporters of decentralized exchanges have distanced themselves from the FTX collapse by establishing that FTX was not a decentralized exchange, and if it was indeed decentralized, fraud would have been impossible. Proponents argue that the FTX implosion strengthens the mantra that “code is law” when interacting with decentralized exchanges—there should be no regulation or government oversight when code is what is controlling funds in these exchanges (Yeung).

In reality, centralized exchanges such as FTX and the people behind them have much more leverage in decentralized exchanges than what proponents of crypto acknowledge. The fallout after the FTX collapse has not only affected FTX and its users, but also adjacent decentralized exchange communities in which FTX and Sam Bankman Fried were involved. Just this week, Bloomberg reported that “contagion from the messy implosion of Sam Bankman-Fried’s crypto empire is spilling into the world of decentralized finance”—after a hedge fund went under due to the FTX collapse, the entirety of their 850 million dollar stake on the decentralized exchange Maple was put in jeopardy (Shukla and Nicolle). Not only did the FTX collapse negatively affect individual decentralized exchanges, but entire decentralized finance communities as a whole. The most shining example is the case of Solana, a decentralized finance ecosystem which Sam Bankman-Fried and FTX had invested in and promoted so heavily to the point where some tokens on the platform were known as “Sam coins” (Protos). Solana’s trading volume cratered 75% to under 20 million dollars following the crash, and to make the situation catastrophically worse, another bombshell revealed that the supposedly decentralized ecosystem was “not controlled by [the community], but by a private key connected to FTX” (Elliot). These revelations regarding the collapse show that FTX was so deeply, horrifically entrenched in the business of some decentralized exchanges. This suggests that so-called “decentralized” exchanges are not at all what they bill themselves to be. Instead of being free from oversight and centralized control, in some instances they are simply a facade to even more fraudulent behavior as demonstrated by the FTX implosion.

Even in cases where decentralized exchanges fall outside the direct reach of centralized exchanges such as FTX, the argument that decentralized exchanges fully protect user funds in lieu of the FTX collapse is simply false. In what has been somewhat buried under the media reporting of the implosion itself, after FTX filed for bankruptcy, it was also subject to a hack which drained over 600 million dollars from their leftover holdings (Powell and Leggatt). Because a truly decentralized exchange is not subject to the centralized control of assets, using such an exchange would prevent the Bankman-Fried scenario of secretly lending out customer deposits. Despite this, these decentralized exchanges are still extremely exposed to being hacked in a similar fashion to FTX. For example, a 600 million dollar attack on the decentralized Ronin crypto exchange occurred just earlier this year (Nicolle), and a similar exchange called Mango Markets was hacked by a teen crypto vigilante for over 67 million dollars just last month (Roberts). These hacks and similar hacks on decentralized exchanges pose a significant threat to the security of these platforms, which renders them futile as a solution to the FTX collapse. The FTX story reiterates the fact that hacks of significant magnitude can target both centralized and decentralized exchanges alike, with no guarantee on the safety of user funds.
The story of FTX and its collapse reveals that the two viewpoints for the future of crypto exchanges—one that advocates for government regulation of centralized crypto exchanges, and one that advocates for the usage of decentralized exchanges—are fundamentally flawed. On one hand, FTX’s collapse proved that government regulation was not only ineffective against fraud, but also that centralized exchanges fundamentally went against the core principle of crypto being a decentralized currency free from central bank and government oversight. On the other hand, FTX’s story exposes that some decentralized exchanges are not as decentralized as they seem, and that they are still susceptible to some of the same hacks that have plagued FTX. With the irreconcilable flaws of both centralized and decentralized exchanges brought to light, the FTX disaster implies that only one viable solution for the future of crypto remains—to not use exchanges in the first place, and instead go back to the roots of self-custody with users storing their own cryptocurrency in their own wallets on their own devices.

## Works Cited
Barr, Kyle. “U.S. Senate Is Still Confused about How to Regulate Crypto after FTX Collapse.” MSN, https://www.msn.com/en-us/news/politics/us-senate-is-still-confused-about-how-to-regulate-crypto-after-ftx-collapse/ar-AA14N5XO.

Biron, Bethany. “FTX Founder Sam Bankman-Fried Donated $40 Million to Political Campaigns Leading into the Midterms, Leaving Some Concerned about Crypto's Place in Washington, Report Says.” Yahoo! News, Yahoo!, https://news.yahoo.com/ftx-founder-sam-bankman-fried-210458468.html.

Browne, Ryan. “Cryptocurrency Exchange FTX Hits $32 Billion Valuation despite Bear Market Fears.” CNBC, CNBC, 1 Feb. 2022, https://www.cnbc.com/2022/01/31/crypto-exchange-ftx-valued-at-32-billion-amid-bitcoin-price-plunge.html.

Cassatt, Amanda. “FTX Showed the Problems of Centralized Finance, and Proved the Need for Defi.” CoinDesk Latest Headlines RSS, CoinDesk, 11 Nov. 2022, https://www.coindesk.com/layer2/2022/11/11/
ftx-showed-the-problems-of-centralized-finance-and-proved-the-need-for-defi/.

“Cefi vs. Defi: Everything You Need to Know.” BeInCrypto, 22 Nov. 2022, https://beincrypto.com/learn/cefi-vs-defi/.
Drawbaugh, Kevin. “Lehman Donors Give Generously to Political Candidates.” Reuters, Thomson Reuters, 11 Sept. 2008, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-lehman-campaign-giving-idINN1127961720080911.

Elliott, Stacy. “Life after FTX: How Solana Defi Is Starting over-without SBF's Serum.” Yahoo!, Yahoo!, https://www.yahoo.com/now/life-ftx-solana-defi-starting-223848156.html.

Feng, Venus, and Tom Maloney. “Sam Bankman-Fried's Net Worth Goes from $16 Billion to Zero after FTX Collapse.” Bloomberg.com, Bloomberg, 11 Nov. 2022, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-11-11/sam-bankman-fried-s-assets-go-from-16-billion-to-zero-after-ftx-collapse.

Waters, and Gillibrand. “Official FTX Statement.”

“FTX.” Sequoia Capital US/Europe, 1 Dec. 2022, https://www.sequoiacap.com/article/sam-bankman-fried-spotlight/.

Piper, Kelsey. “Sam Bankman-Fried Tries to Explain Himself.” Vox, Vox, 16 Nov. 2022, https://www.vox.com/future-perfect/23462333/sam-bankman-fried-ftx-cryptocurrency-effective-altruism-crypto-bahamas-philanthropy.

Powell, Farran, and Johanna Leggatt. “FTX Collapse: From Hero to Zero in 24 Hours.” Forbes, Forbes Magazine, 8 Dec. 2022, https://www.forbes.com/advisor/au/investing/cryptocurrency/ftx-from-hero-to-zero-in-24-hours/.

Rapoza, Kenneth. “The FTX Crisis Brought Investors to Decentralized Exchanges. Here's Why They Might Leave.” Forbes, Forbes Magazine, 5 Dec. 2022, https://www.forbes.com/sites/kenrapoza/2022/12/04/the-ftx-crisis-brought-investors-to-decentralized-exchanges-heres-why-they-might-leave/?sh=33770b259ebc.

Ray, John J. “Declaration of John J. Ray III In Support Of Chapter II Petitions and First Day Pleadings.”

Reuters. “How FTX Bought Its Way to Become the 'Most Regulated' Crypto Exchange.” Fox Business, Fox Business, 18 Nov. 2022, https://www.foxbusiness.com/markets/how-ftx-bought-its-way-to-become-the-most-regulated-crypto-exchange.

Roberts. A Solana Hacker Calls $67M He Stole from the Mango Platform a ‘Profitable Trading Strategy’. Fortune Crypto (Online).

Shukla, Sidhartha, and Emily Nicolle. “Crypto Fund Orthogonal Defaults on $36 Million Debt as FTX Contagion Spreads.” Bloomberg.com, Bloomberg, 6 Dec. 2022, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-12-06/crypto-fund-orthogonal-defaults-on-36-million-debt-as-ftx-contagion-spreads.

Nicolle. Massive Crypto Hacks Test ‘Code is Law’ Ethos. Bloomberg Crypto (Online).

Smith, Timothy. “What Is FTX?” Investopedia, Investopedia, 8 Dec. 2022, https://www.investopedia.com/ftx-exchange-5200842.

“Solana's Close Ties to FTX Cause Financial and Structural Damage.” Protos, 18 Nov. 2022, https://protos.com/solanas-close-ties-to-ftx-cause-financial-and-structural-damage/.

“Tom Brady, Steph Curry and Kevin O'Leary Set to Lose Big from FTX Bankruptcy Filing.” MSN, https://www.msn.com/en-us/money/companies/tom-brady-steph-curry-and-kevin-o-leary-set-to-lose-big-from-ftx-bankruptcy-filing/ar-AA140ULU.

Wang, Jeffrey. “Opinion : the Future of Cryptocurrency after FTX and Sam Bankman-Fried.” The Wall Street Journal, Dow Jones & Company, 6 Dec. 2022, https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-future-of-cryptocurrency-after-ftx-and-sam-bankman-fried-investors-exchange-value-money-11670353419.

Warren, Elizabeth. “Opinion : Regulate Crypto or It'll Take down the Economy.” The Wall Street Journal, Dow Jones & Company, 23 Nov. 2022, https://www.wsj.com/articles/regulate-crypto-or-itll-take-down-the-economy-fraud-reporting-know-your-customer-loophole-energy-disclosure-ftx-bankman-fried-ftx-11669123750.

Wright, Turner. “Crypto Skeptic Brad Sherman: Federal Financial Regulators 'Sound like Sam Bankman-Fried'.” Cointelegraph, Cointelegraph, 16 Nov. 2022, https://cointelegraph.com/news/crypto-skeptic-brad-sherman-federal-financial-regulators-sound-like-sam-bankman-fried.

Yeung. (2019). Regulation by blockchain: The emerging battle for supremacy between the Code of Law and Code as Law. Modern Law Review, 82(2), 207–239.  